---
layout: home
---

<meta name="description" content="Surveillance devices in Chicago">

<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://maxcdn.bootstrapcdn.com/bootstrap/3.3.5/css/bootstrap.min.css" integrity="sha512-dTfge/zgoMYpP7QbHy4gWMEGsbsdZeCXz7irItjcC3sPUFtf0kuFbDz/ixG7ArTxmDjLXDmezHubeNikyK
GVyQ==" crossorigin="anonymous">
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://maxcdn.bootstrapcdn.com/bootstrap/3.3.5/css/bootstrap-theme.min.css" integrity="sha384-aUGj/X2zp5rLCbBxumKTCw2Z50WgIr1vs/PFN4praOTvYXWlVyh2UtNUU0KAUhAX" crossorigi
n="anonymous">

<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/style.css" />

Police Surveillance in Chicago
==============================

by [Jennifer Helsby](https://twitter.com/redshiftzero) for [Lucy Parsons
Labs](https://lucyparsonslabs.com).

Chicago is one of the most heavily surveilled cities in the world. Cameras,
automatic license plate readers, cell site simulators and many other
surveillance devices are currently used in the city by the Chicago Police
Department and its sister agencies. However, many Chicago residents are unaware
of the scope of the surveillance systems, their huge cost, and the privacy
implications of their use. Here we survey the major parts of the surveillance
system in Chicago with respect to:

- costs

- capabilities

- efficacy

- legal and privacy concerns

This intro to police surveillance technologies was produced from ongoing
research through FOIA documents acquired by [Lucy Parsons
Labs](https://lucyparsonslabs.com) as well as some public data. We'll be
updating this intro as we learn more through our ongoing investigations. [Email
the author](mailto:jen@redshiftzero.com) if you would like to submit other data.

Surveillance Cameras
====================

Video monitoring is the most well-known part of Chicago's surveillance
infrastructure, consisting of a network of well over 50,000 cameras (including
cameras on the CTA). This system is operated by Chicago's Office of Emergency
Management (OEMC).

![Cameras](img/video.png)

### Where

The locations of the subset of cameras operated by CPD and DHS are known, as
they are not intended to be covert. A map of these "blue light" cameras - so
called due to the flashing bright blue light on some of the older cameras
operated by CPD also known as "Police Observation Devices" or PODs - in
Operation Virtual Shield (OVS) is below. These locations were acquired through
FOIA by the author.

However, the locations of the cameras connected into the [Private Sector Camera
Initiative](http://www.cityofchicago.org/city/en/depts/oem/provdrs/tech/svcs/link_your_cameras.html)
wherein private cameras from Chicago businesses and sister agencies allow their
feeds to be accessed by the city - are not publically known. The author
attempted to FOIA for their locations, but was denied due to "privacy reasons".
Other Chicago agencies with a significant number of cameras in the network
include [Chicago Public Schools
(CPS)](http://eyeingchicago.com/blog/2014/10/10/how-many-cameras-in-the-cps-7000.html),
[Chicago Transit Authority
(CTA)](http://eyeingchicago.com/blog/2014/10/10/how-many-cameras-in-the-cta-23000.html),
[Chicago Housing Authority
(CHA)](http://eyeingchicago.com/blog/2014/10/14/how-many-cameras-in-the-cha-3000.html),
Midway and O'Hare airports, and Chicago Park District.

### Costs

The cameras purchased by the city - ignoring the significant maintenance costs -
cost from $12,000 to $29,000, depending on the version of the camera. Given
that the city has thousands of cameras, this puts the cost of the camera system
at least at tens of millions of taxpayer dollars. Older cameras are clearly
denoted with the logo of the Chicago Police Department along with a bright blue
light. Newer cameras are nondescript and blend into the environment.

Operation Virtual Shield\: Police Observation Devices
-----------------------------------------------------

### Capabilities

The cameras in Operation Virtual Shield have [pan and zoom
capability](http://www.aclu-il.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/Surveillance-Camera-Report1.pdf),
and are able to zoom in close enough to read a license plate or to capture a
still shot for facial recognition purposes.

### Efficacy

Police [claim a
reduction](http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748704538404574539910412824756)
in crime in the vicinity of the cameras. However, no [experimental study has
been performed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Randomized_controlled_trial) that
controls for the many other
[confounding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Confounding) factors that are
present - including other CPD programs intended to reduce crime. Agencies like
the CTA claim that [hundreds of
arrests](http://www.transitchicago.com/safety/cameras.aspx) have resulted at
least in part from their cameras.

### Legal and Privacy Concerns

There are numerous privacy implications associated with a pervasive video
monitoring system. While the cameras capture people moving in public spaces,
Chicago residents' reasonable expectation of privacy may not extend to cameras
capturing their attendance at political meetings, religious events, or medical
appointments. Video surveillance as widespread as in Chicago may constitute a
real threat to freedom of expression and association.

In addition, there need to be clear privacy policies governing the collection
and storage of footage from the OEMC video surveillance system. There should not
be indefinite storage of data captured from cameras unless related to an ongoing
investigation. An important accountability issue concerns the detection and
prevention of abuse by camera operators that may use the cameras to monitor and
track Chicago residents without a legitimate public safety or law enforcement
purpose. It is currently unknown how often this occurs.


Automatic License Plate Recognition
===================================

Automatic License Plate Recognition, or ALPR, take images of vehicles in public
spaces, analyze the text on their license plates, and record the timestamp and
position of the car (based on GPS coordinates).

### Where

Unknown since the ALPRs are mobile. Documents acquired by the author in 2015
show that there were at least 35 vehicles in the Chicago Police Department that
had ALPRs mounted to them. Chicago can also use their video surveillance network
to scan license plates.

### Costs

CPD has spent more than
[$500,000](http://inthesetimes.com/article/17659/cpd-tightlipped-about-use-of-license-plate-scanners-despite-new-contract)
on ALPR technologies in recent years.

### Capabilities

Chicago Police Department purchases Motorola / PAGIS automated license plate
readers. These devices track the GPS location a license plate was seen and the
timestamp. The scanned plates are then checked against a Hot List that consist
of plates of interest. According to FOIA documents acquired by the author, there
might be as many as 300,000 license plates stored in the Hot List at any one
time in Chicago - meaning that approximately 1 in 10 Chicagoans has their
vehicle on the Hot List.

![ALPRs in Chicago](img/alpr_cpd.png)
(Documents acquired by Jennifer Helsby)

![Automatic License Plate Reader in Chicago](img/alpr.jpg)

(Image Courtesy of Freddy Martinez)

![ALPRs in Chicago](img/alpr_example.png)

### Efficacy

Documents from the Chicago Police Department acquired by the author show that
even when the Department had only 4 ALPRs, they were able to scan over 1 million
plates, [resulting in hundreds of recovered
vehicles](img/alpr_efficacy_old.png), among other successes.

### Legal and Privacy Concerns

Even a incomplete record of where an individual\'s car has been provides
detailed information about the activities of that person. In Oakland, over 4.6
million license plate scans from ALPR systems [were released in a FOIA
request](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2015/03/we-know-where-youve-been-ars-acquires-4-6m-license-plate-scans-from-the-cops/),
providing detailed information about Oakland residents\' activities - including
activities protected by the First amendment.

Concerns over data retention policies and data sharing also should be addressed
and publically disclosed. The criteria that lands a given plate on the Hot List
should be publically disclosed. Check out the [EFF\'s excellent
FAQ](https://www.eff.org/sls/tech/automated-license-plate-readers/faq) on ALPR
technology for more information.

At the state level in Illinois, there are [currently several
bills](http://inthesetimes.com/article/17769/Illinois_bill_challenges_license_plate_surveillance)
that have been introduced (but not yet passed) to deal with this problem.

Biometrics
==========

Biometrics is the use of physical markers like facial features, fingerprints, or
gait for identification purposes.

![Facial Recognition](img/facerecog.png)

### Where

All cameras in Chicago's network may have still shots captured from them to use
for identification purposes.

###  Costs

[FOIA
documents](https://www.muckrock.com/foi/chicago-169/mobile-biometric-technologies-chicago-police-department-20268/)
indicate that at least $63,000 have been spent on mobile fingerprint scanners.
[Other reporting](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2014/06/first-chicago-robber-caught-via-facial-recognition-gets-22-years/)
indicates upwards of $5.4 million has been spend on [facial recognition
technology](http://au.nec.com/en_AU/solutions/security-and-public-safety/biometrics/neoface-facial-recognition-overview.html),
enabling frames captured from a city camera to be compared with an existing
database.

### Capabilities

Facial recognition systems can be incredibly sophisticated, but likely what
occurs in Chicago is faces captured from video are compared with shots taken
upon arrest.

### Efficacy

At least [one
arrest](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2014/06/first-chicago-robber-caught-via-facial-recognition-gets-22-years/)
is claimed to have resulted from the use of facial recognition technology in
Chicago, though the usefulness of facial recognition in even this one arrest is
[in dispute](http://www.theverge.com/2014/8/8/5982727/face-wreck-how-advanced-tech-comes-up-short-for-police).

### Legal and Privacy Concerns

The secure storage of biometric data is increasingly important as biometrics
such as fingerprints are used for authentication purposes. In Illinois we have
the [Biometric Information Privacy Act
(BIPA)](http://www.ilga.gov/legislation/ilcs/ilcs3.asp?ActID=3004&ChapterID=57)
which regulates the collection of biometric data, by required consent as well as
limits on how long the data can be stored. There are currently
[lawsuits](http://www.biometricupdate.com/201508/states-considering-biometrics-capture-laws-may-look-to-illinois-privacy-laws)
against companies like Facebook and Shutterfly for collecing biometric
information for commercial purposes in violation of this act. Unfortunately, law
enforcement may not be regulated by BIPA.

Cell Site Simulators
====================

Cell site simulators or IMSI catchers, also often referred to as Stingrays after
the device sold by Harris Corporation, are controversial cellphone surveillance
devices. They operate by masquerading as a cellphone tower, forcing any phones
in the vicinity to connect to them.

[]!img/cellsite.png](Cell Site Simulator)

### Where

The locations of these devices are unknown as they are mobile and some are as
small as to be [easily
concealed](http://arstechnica.com/security/2013/09/the-body-worn-imsi-catcher-for-all-your-covert-phone-snooping-needs/).
However there do exists some efforts
[to](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=de.srlabs.snoopsnitch&hl=en)
[detect](https://secupwn.github.io/Android-IMSI-Catcher-Detector/) them.

### Costs

Over the last ten years, over \$700,000 has been spent on cell tracking
equipment including Harris Corporations\'s Stingray, KingFish, and AmberJack and
Digital Receiver Technologies\' DRTBox. The details of cell site simulator
purchases is known from work by Freddy Martinez, who first revealed that Chicago
police had purchased Stingray devices from Harris corporation and [Ali
Winston](https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2185449-15-3508-responsive-documents.html),
who
[revealed](https://www.revealnews.org/article/chicago-and-los-angeles-have-used-dirt-box-surveillance-for-a-decade/)
that cell site simulators had been first purchased by Chicago police as far back
as 2005.

### Capabilities

Depending on [the model and upgrades
available](https://theintercept.com/surveillance-catalogue/) on the specific
cell site simulator, these devices can be used to get the International Mobile
Subscriber Identities (IMSI) of those near the cell site simulator, can be used
to interfere with the cellphone\'s ability to make calls and send texts (denial
of service), and in some cases can enable the [interception of the
content](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2013/09/meet-the-machines-that-steal-your-phones-data/)
of messages and calls. Read more at the EFF\'s excellent FAQ about [Cell Site
Simulators](https://www.eff.org/sls/tech/cell-site-simulators/faq).

### Efficacy

Unknown. It is also unclear how often these devices have been used in the city,
though there are reports that they have been used at political protests.

### Legal and Privacy Concerns

There are serious legal questions surrounding cell site simulators. The manner
in which these devices operate involves the indiscriminate data collection [from
phones of innocent
bystanders](https://www.aclunc.org/blog/new-docs-doj-admits-stingrays-spy-innocent-bystanders).

Recently, the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of Justice have
both published new policies on the use of these devices at the federal level,
requiring warrants for their use. In Chicago, these devices have been used with
Pen Register/Trap and Trace orders but [not
warrants](https://www.eff.org/document/matter-application-united-states-america-order-relating-telephones-used-suppressed).

These devices are also potentially in violation of [state level protection from
local surveillance
regulation](http://www.ilga.gov/legislation/ilcs/ilcs3.asp?ActID=3582&ChapterID=54).

![Harris Stingray cell site simulator](img/stingray.jpg)
(Harris Corporation\'s Stingray II Credit\: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office)

Shotspotter
===========

Shotspotter is an audio surveillance system. It consists of sensors -
microphones - distributed over a neighborhood in order to determine the location
of a gunshot. This sensor data can be used to distinguish gunshots from similar
sounds such as fireworks and cars backfiring.

![Shotspotter sensor](img/shotspotter.png)

### Where

Distributed through the [Englewood, Harrison, Chicago Lawn and Grand
Crossing](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/10/26/shotspotter-gunshot-liste_n_2025220.html)
neighborhoods with approximately 45-60 sensors.

### Costs

Shotspotter costs approximately [$100,000 for every 1.5 square
miles"](http://www.shotspotter.com/news/article/shotspotter-gunshot-listening-technology-comes-to-chicago-police-force)
of coverage. This Shotspotter deployment in Chicago was [funded primarily
through asset forfeiture.](http://chicago.suntimes.com/uncategorized/7/71/189377/gunfire-location-sensor-data-show-residents-fail-to-call-911)
In addition to the cost of the devices themselves, there are additional costs
due to [police responding to false alarms from fireworks and cars
backfiring.](http://www.wnyc.org/story/311533-gunshot-detection-sensors-newark-result-17-arrests-over-three-years/)

![Shotspotter sensor](img/gunshotsensor.JPG)

Credit: Image from [wnyc.org](https://www.wnyc.org/story/311533-gunshot-detection-sensors-newark-result-17-arrests-over-three-years/)

### Capabilities

These devices are used for the detection of gunshots. They operate by
distributing sensors over a broad area, and using the sound wave and time of
arrival at each sensor for detecting gunshots and localizing the position of the
gunshot.

### Efficacy

Efficacy of the devices in Chicago is unknown. There are
[several](http://yaledailynews.com/blog/2012/03/20/shotspotter-faces-uncertain-future/)
reports of issues concerning false positives reported by the Shotspotter system.
However, it does appear that gun crime is [significantly
underreported](http://articles.baltimoresun.com/2014-04-20/news/bs-md-ci-gunshot-detection-report-20140420_1_baltimore-police-gun-discharges-gun-violence)
in many US cities.

### Legal and Privacy Concerns

Shotspotter is marketing its technology for several new markets, including in
schools for school shooting early detection and response. However, the
increasing use of this technology in areas where people will be speaking raises
concerns with how the data is handled and stored, as the Shotspotter microphones
may incidentally pick up a nearby conversation.

Social Media Monitoring
=======================

Manual and automated monitoring of speech on social media such as Twitter and
Instagram.

![Socmint](img/socialmedia.png)

### Where

Currently used by
[CPD](http://directives.chicagopolice.org/directives/data/a7a57b38-147b1793-bcd14-7b19-60f8232acf57b5f8.html).

### Costs

Manual monitoring of social media is close to free, however automated tools are
being used more often. One such tool is Geofeedia - in use by the Chicago Police
Department - and it costs around [\$1,450 a month for five
users](https://www.cjr.org/united_states_project/social_media_geotagging_local_journalists.php).
From documents acquired by the author, police departments spend \$12,000-22,000
for an initial license and setup, depending on the number of users.

### Capabilities

Users of these tools are able to look at geotagged posts over a range of social
media services including Twitter and Instagram. In addition to [geographic based
monitoring](https://www.inverse.com/article/8358-your-social-media-posts-are-fueling-the-future-of-police-surveillance),
keyword based monitoring is also performed.

### Efficacy

Unknown.

### Legal and Privacy Concerns

Even though social media monitoring is relatively new, there have already been
very serious implications for those targeted, including in one case in New York
City where [a 17-year old faced terrorism
charges](http://www.dnainfo.com/new-york/20150203/bushwick/terrorist-charge-dropped-against-teen-accused-of-emoji-threats-police)
and had his home searched for his use of gun emojis on Twitter.

In addition, the use of social media monitoring tools to closely surveil those
involved in political action should be concerning due to its [chilling
effect](https://www.accessnow.org/13503-2/) on 1st amendment protected
activities. [Recent
documents](http://www.scribd.com/doc/282037220/CPD-1-Amendment-Worksheet)
acquired by Freddy Martinez describe how [Black Lives Matter protestors were
monitored by Chicago
police](https://chicago.suntimes.com/chicago-politics/the-watchdogs-chicago-police-monitored-black-protesters-post-ferguson/).

What's Next
===========

Chicago residents have legitimate questions surrounding the use of these
technologies: Are appropriate policies and procedures in place to ensure these
systems are responsibly used? To what degree are these systems necessary or even
useful? Do the benefits of these systems justify the tens of millions of
taxpayer dollars being spent on them? Do members of the public want this level
of surveillance to be used?

In the past, police surveillance of public spaces was constrained by resources
such as availability of police officers. However, surveillance technology is
producing a significant expansion of police capabilities. Police were
historically unable to follow every resident with a police car, but with new
surveillance technologies they may be able to effectively accomplish the same
goal albeit in a less disruptive manner.

Members of the public need to recognize the [far-reaching
implications](http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2680266) of
giving over this level of power to law enforcement. The transition from police
officers having a restricted ability to follow and monitor suspicious people to
having pervasive surveillance capabilities is occurring in our city today. We
must have public knowledge of surveillance capabilities, policies and procedures
in order to have the critical debate about this infrastructure as well as to
campaign for transparency and accountability.

Follow [Lucy Parsons Labs](https://twitter.com/lucyparsonslabs) on Twitter for
more.

By Jennifer Helsby[@redshiftzero](https://www.twitter.com/redshiftzero) for
[Lucy Parsons Labs](https://lucyparsonslabs.com). Last updated Friday, February
16th, 2018.
